'''
This was a dataing mining research project I did for my MBA that was not apart of my data science bootcamp. 
The graphs do not upload but I will try to find a way to upload all the tables.
The word file with graphs is 67 pages. Here is most of the writing part:
'''

Data Mining Project
Illinois State University Student Enrollment

By
Harish Krishnaswamy, MBA
Scott Schmidt, MBA


Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction & Research Objectives
Descriptive Analysis 
Stepwise/Logistic Regression
Decision Trees
Neural Network
Confirmatory Analysis 
Conclusion
Group Means Comparison
References
Appendix 




Executive Summary
Illinois State University has recently been known for being one of the best schools in the state doe its price. However, what factors might play a role in a student leaving or enrolling in a different school? Also, what factors might play a role in a student staying at Illinois State University? This paper will use different data mining techniques (descriptive analysis, simple regression, decision trees, neural networks) to analyze what major factors are important in a student’s enrollment at Illinois State University. Based on these factors, Illinois State University can make better decisions on knowing which students to accept. In addition, these factors could show strengths (weaknesses) that the university has (or needs improvement on). 
Originally, the major factors we chose that we thought would be important included the following: , demographics, gender, origin, ethnicity, distance from ISU, income, market segment, city, zip code, grades, market value, segments, and Pell Grants. As time went on, we narrowed down our search more specifically toward these nine factors which are grouped in the following table:
Student data
Attributes important to Student
Demographic data
GPA
ACT Composite 
Total Consumer Expenditures 
Student initiated events
PCTPELL
Family Income Median
Undecided Dum
Distance from ISU
High School Low Income %
After the four analysis were completed, it there was a strong correlation that the most significant factors in enrollment at Illinois State University came down to the following four: Pell Grants, number of student initiated events, whether the student had a major or not, and distance from ISU. GPA and ACT scores were also minor factors but not as significant as the major four listed. 
	After the analysis, there will be a confirmatory analysis which will help show how accurate our findings were. The conclusion summarize our results and will also have a group means comparison which will discuss how reliable our findings are. 












Introduction & Research Objectives/Questions: 
The purpose of this project is to analyze why students are leaving Illinois State University for other schools. Specifically, this report will help discover trends on what factors might influence influence an individual to leave the university. This is important because Illinois State University can recognize these trends and accept more loyal applicants. In addition, weaknesses might be recognized and the university might be able to improve in certain areas if needed. Some questions this paper will answer will be:
Why might an individual leave for a better, worse, or equal school?
Are there any areas in need of improvement?
What factors have little to no influence in a student leaving a school?
What factors should Illinois State University look for in accepting an applicant?
Why might some of the factors discovered influence a student to leave the university? 
What specific factors make the biggest impact on student enrollment? 

In order to fully understand this paper, a few terms have to be defined. One is R2 which can be defined as“R squared measures the proportion of the variation in y that is explained by the variation in x.  R squared equals the total variation - unexplained variation divided by total variation. The number is always in between 0 and 1. If the number is 1 it means that there is a perfect match between the line and data points. If the number is 0 it means there is no linear relationship between x and y” (Power Point). In simple terms, R squared is a statistical measure of how well the regression line fit the actual data. 
Another key term is statistical significance. According to the Power Point, statistical significance is the degree of risk that you are willing to reject the null hypothesis when it is actually true. The significance level values associated with it has a certain conventional implication. For example, if the level of significance is .01, it means there is a 1% you will reject the null-hypothesis when it is actually true. If the level of significance is .05, it means there is a 5% chance you will reject the null hypothesis when it is actually true. Rejeting the null hypothesis when it is actually true is also called a Type 1 error. Generally, a Type 1 error occurs when the researcher concludes that a relationship exists in the population when in reality it does not exist. For the sake of this project, we used a level of significance of .05. This means we rejected factors that had a higher p value above .05. 


The next section will conduct some basic analysis using graphs to begin to conclude which factors make a significant role in a student’s enrollment. 

Descriptive Analysis
This section will use descriptive statistics and visual summaries (graphs, charts, maps, etc.) to showcase the data in such a way that new insights may be gained. In addition, it will show  Group Wise Comparisons. 

This graph shows that a good majority of students who enroll into Illinois State University end up dropping out. Approximately 14,000 students dropped out when 6000 enrolled. Further upcoming graphs will try to analyze which factors play a role in students staying or dropping out of Illinois State University.



1 = African American; 3 = Asian, 4 = Hispanic; 5 = Pacific Islander; 6 = White; 7 = Two or More Races; 8 = No Response; 9 = non-resident alien.  

More than half of white students leave for another university. Three African students leave for every student who stays at the university. About five Hispanics will leave for every student who stays at the university. There are almost no American Indians or Pacific Islanders that attend the university. Therefore, there is not enough data to conclude with those ethnic group types. If the university wants a more ethnic background, it should accept more students from those ethnic groups.


Zip code surprisingly does not have a big impact on student enrollment. However, the zip codes between 60609 and 61081 had the highest chance of not enrolling at Illinois State University with only 25% enrolling. As discussed previously, zip code does not play a big role into the enrollment process. 


This graph is one of the most important graphs we discovered. Students with 6 is more initiated contacts with the university were very likely to enroll at the university. About three students enrolled for every student who left with less than six contacts. Students with 5 or 6 initiated contacts have about a 50% chance of enrolling at the university. On the other hand, students who did not have a contact left the university. In fact, students with less than 3 initiated contacts almost always left the university. 


Once again, this graph shows that money (in this case total consumer expenditures) has little impact on university enrollment. The lowest total consumer expenditures does have a higher chance of leaving the university. However, as a whole, income does not play a big impact on student enrollment and should not be considered too intensely. 



1=American Indian; 2 = African American; 3 = Asian, 4 = Hispanic; 5 = Pacific Islander; 6 = White; 7 = Two or More Races; 8 = No Response; 9 = non-resident alien.  

This graph shows that white students are the majority of students that attend Illinois State University. About three students for every four white students however will end of leaving the university for a better school. For every two white students that stay at Illinois State University, about one will leave for a worse school.
	African Americans are more likely to leave for a worse school. For about every African student that stays at Illinois State, about one student will leave for a worse school and one for a better school. 
	Asian students are most likely to leave for a better school. Not many Asian students left for a worse school. 
	For every Hispanic that attends Illinois State University, about one will leave for a better school and one for a worse school. 




More females are likely to stay as Illinois State University. With that being said, females are also much more likely to leave for a better university than males. Twice as many females left for the university than males. 
This graph above shows that one specific major (labeled as 2450) has an enormous amount of students not attending the university. The majors were not listed on the Excel sheet as further research needs to be looked into as for what major and why this major is severely struggling. 

This graph shows that if students are undeclared majors, they have a much higher chance of leaving Illinois State University. Only about one of of ten students stayed at the university who was undeclared (1000 out of 5000). About 5 students stayed at the university for every eight that did not for students with a major. In conclusion, students who do not have a major are much more likely to leave the university. 



For the most part, income does not have an impact on whether a student enrolls in the university. This graph has similar relationships to other income graphs in that there is not much of a correlation between income and staying at the university. However, families with a median income less than 67,000 have a slightly chance of leaving the university. Families with less money may be more likely to not be able to afford college as this variable should not be a huge surprise. 


This graph shows that students who are closer to Illinois State University have a slightly less chance of leaving the college. Generally, a student would stay for about two who leave the university when if the student is less than 102 miles away. Students who were beyond 102 miles away have a pretty likely chance of leaving the university. About three students leave for every student who stays beyond that 102 mile mark. 


Once again, this graph shows that students in the lowest income bracket have a slightly higher chance of leaving Illinois State University. Overall, low income does not have an enormous impact on enrollment at the university. 


This graph shows that students with lower ACT scores (below 23) are more likely to enroll at Illinois State University. Students with high ACT scores (above 27) are much more likely to not enroll at the university. These students with an above 27 ACT score had a more than 75% of leaving Illinois State. Students with an ACT score below 21 had about a 55% of enrolling here at the university. Previous graphs show that students with a higher ACT tend to leave for better universities. 

This graph shows that families in the higher total consumer expenditures have a slightly better chance at enrolling at the university. Families with more disposable income have a better chance at helping students pay for their college. 

This graph shows that students with a lower GPA (below 3) actually have a higher chance at enrolling at the university. We suspect that students with a higher GPA leave for better universities based upon previous data.  











This graph shows that students were more likely to drop out if they were more than 150 miles away from home. This should not come as a surprise as many students would want to be closer to home.


 1=American Indian; 2 = African American; 3 = Asian, 4 = Hispanic; 5 = Pacific Islander; 6 = White; 7 = Two or More Races; 8 = No Response; 9 = non-resident alien.  

This graph shows the different ethnic groups and whether they chose to stay or leave Illinois State University. As the graph shows, the majority of Ilinois State University students are White and African American. There are very few American Indian and Pacific Islander.
In addition, Hispanic students have a very high probability of leaving the university.







Three students dropped out for every student who stayed with a GPA higher than 3.9 (more than likely leaving for better schools). Three students dropped out for every student who stayed with a GPA between 3.59 and 3.9. Three students dropped out for every student who stayed with a GPA between 3.31 and 3.59. Two students dropped out for every student who stayed with a GPA between 3 and 3.31. Less than two students dropped out for every student with a GPA below 3.

Four students left for every student who stayed with ACT above 27 (most likely for a better school as discussed in a previous graph). Two students left for every student who stayed with an ACT score between 25 and 27. About two and a half students left for every student who stayed with an ACT score between 23 and 25.  Less than 2 students left the university for every student who stayed with an ACT score between 21 and 23. Almost one student stayed for every student who left for an ACT score below 21. The surprising part of this data is that as the ACT scores get lower, there is a better chance that students stay in the university.


This graph shows that the higher the ACT score, the more likely the student might leave. Students with a higher ACT score had a higher probability of leaving for a better school. For example, students with above a 27 ACT score had more than a 75% chance of leaving for a different university. Whereas students with below a 21 had only about a 60% chance of leaving for a different university.

Families whose financial assets are less than $48,000 have a 75% chance of dropping out which is higher than all the other income brackets. Families with income brackets above $48,000 had about a 70% of dropping out.


This graph shows that demographics does not really impact on whether the student leaves the university or not. However, there is a higher chance that the student will leave the university if they come from an urban region.

Family median income that was less than $67,000 had a slightly higher chance of dropping out of Illinois State University. As discussed previously, families in the lower income bracket may run out of money to support to send the student to college.

This graph shows that is the family income median is below $67,000 then there is a slightly higher chance that the student will drop out. These students had approximately a 75% of dropping out. Family income between 110,000 and 130,000 has about a 65% of dropping out of Illinois State university. This minor statistic could be because students who come from families with less money may have to drop out for work or simply because they can no longer afford college.




This is one of the most critical graphs. There is a high correlation of students staying within the university if they attend more events. If students attended more than 6 events, they had a 75% of staying at Illinois State University. This shows that the amount of events attended is directly correlated to the loyalness of the candidate. For example, those that attend less than 3 events have about an 80% of leaving the university.





This graph shows that students in higher poverty have a greater chance of moving out of Illinois State University. For example, students who are 14.43% to 73.08% had more than a 75% of leaving the university. Students who had less than a 3.02% in poverty had about a 65% chance of leaving the university. Families (and students) with less money may be more tempted to find work, go to a cheaper university, or move back home to save money.  


This graph shows that if students are not in poverty they have a less chance of leaving Illinois State University. For example, those that are 96.8% to 100% not in poverty, have about a 70% chance of staying at Illinois State University. Those students who are below 85.57% in poverty have about a 75% of leaving the university. Some students who are not able to afford school stay may have to drop out or move back to home which could explain the percentage drop. 
 01 - Applied Science and Technology;
 02 - Arts and Sciences
 03 - Business
 04 - Education
 05 - Fine Arts
 06 - Appears to be no longer used
 07 - Mennonite College of Nursing  
 08 - Undecided

This is one of the more useful graphs we discovered. It clearly shows that students who are undeclared majors have a much higher chance of leaving the university. For example, education majors almost have a 50% of enrollment while undeclared have almost a 90% of not coming to Illinois State University. Lastly, art and sciences majors had the highest risk of leaving illinois State University with about a 70% drop out rate.
 

If students initiate contact with the university equal or greater than three times there is approximately a 50 percent chance they will drop out. If students initiate contact with the university equal to or greater than seven times then there is about a 75 percent chance they will drop out.


This is one of the most important visual graphs we discovered. It shows that students who enroll at Illinois State University have a very individualized Pell Grant within the 21% to 25%. We believe that Illinois State Pell Grants vary within this range but additional outside research on Pell Grants would have to be concluded.

In conclusion, from our descriptive analysis we learned that many factors that you would think to be important such as income, gender, GPA, and ACT score did not make a significant factor in whether or not a student enrolled at Illinois State University or not. We slowly began to see the correlation that Pell Grants, number of initiated events, distance, and people with a major did make an impact, however. The next section with regressions will further evaluate whether or not these factors and their importance in enrollment.

Stepwise/Logistic Regression  According to Sheltman, “When we are examining the relationship between a quantitative outcome and a single quantitative explanatory variable, simple linear regression is the most commonly considered analysis method. The simple" part tells us we are only considering a single explanatory variable (Seltman 2015).”  In other words, it analyzes an explanatory variable that is categorical. According to Bougie, it is used when the dependent variable is non metric (2013).  According to the Power Point, Logistic Regression selects regression coefficient to force predicted values for Y to be between (0,1), produces S-shaped regression predictions rather than straight line, and selects these coefficient through “Maximum Likelihood” estimation technique.

According to the Power Point, in a logistical regression: 
•Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) - smaller is better
•Adjusted R2 - bigger is better
•Akaike’s Information Criterion, corrected (AICc) - smaller is better
•Schwartz’s Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) - smaller is better.
•Both AIC & BIC measures are a rough proxy for the relative quality of a statistical model where a penalty is added for more variables.
 
Generally, we focused the logistical regression on the factors within the following table:

Student data
Attributes important to Student
Income data
GPA
ACT Composite
Total Consumer Expenditures 
Student initiated events
PCTPELL
Family Income Median
Undecided Dum
Distance from ISU
High School Low Income %

































This graph shows that students who are around the 25% Pell Grant range have a very high chance at enrolling at Illinois State University. 



If a high school has a low income percentage more than 40% then there is a likely chance that the student will not enroll. Students who were in the 90 to 130 miles away range had the most people enroll at Illinois State University; however, that is this mile range is more than likely within the Chicago area. Students with ACT scores between 20 and 28 had a large majority of enrolled students. 





 
 
This graphs shows that undecided major, Pell Grants, # of initiated events, ACT, and GPA can explain .454 of the reasoning for whether a student enrolls at Illinois State University. 
 
 
 
 

This graph states that the biggest factors towards an enrollment include the following: undecided, Pell Grant, Family Income Median, Distance from ISU, # of student initiated events, ACT, and high school GPA. Factors such as total consumer expenditures and low income percentages did not have a major influence on enrollment. 

In conclusion, the computer shows the PValue at 0 meaning that these factors (# of student initiated events, Pell Grant, undecided, ACT, GPA, distance from ISU, family income median) are all very significant factors. This should be no surprise as other graphs were indicating similar key indicators. Therefore, our stepwise regression analysis concluded likely results as our descriptive analysis. Pell Grants, number of initiated contacts, and distance from ISU played significant roles in whether a student enrolled at Illinois State University or not. ACT score and high school GPA play minor roles as well.

Decision Trees is a hierarchical collection of rules that describes how to divide a collection of records into successively smaller groups of record. With each successive division, the members of the resulting segments become more and more similar to one another (increasingly pure) with respect to the target. It is a desirable data mining technique because it is good for exploring relationships without having a good prior model, handles large problems easily, and results are very interpretable (Power Point). 



ISU actual:  2888 enrolled students 
ISU predicted: 2819

ISU actual: 4259 enrolled students 
ISU predicted: 4328


This graph is a decision tree partitioning type model. Once again, it shows that Pell Grants play an enormous factor in choosing Illinois State University. Almost no students came to the university whose Pell Grant was above 25.8%. Students who had Pell Grants less than 25.6% had about a 58% of enrolling at the university. If students had less than the 25.6% Pell Grant and initiated more than two contacts with the university, they almost enrolled with the university every time. 


ISU actual: 6177 
ISU Predicted: 6173

ISU actual: 14544
ISU predicted: 14458



This graph is considered a Bootstrap Forest. 
ISU Actual: 14454
ISU Predicted: 14509

ISU Actual: 6177
ISU Predicted: 6123
 

ISU Actual: 11513
ISU Predicted: 11513

ISU Actual: 4986
ISU Predicted: 4986

In conclusion, Pell Grants and amount of initiated contacts are the two biggest factors in whether a student enrolled at the university or not. These two factors alone can make a fairly good prediction on whether a student enrolls at the university or not. 

Neural Network  According to Chaughan, “Neural networks are non-linear statistical data modeling tools. They can be used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs or to find patterns in data. Using neural networks as a tool, data warehousing firms are harvesting information from datasets in the process known as data mining.”  Neural networks help the user make more informed decisions. .



Our R-Squared was .99 which is shows a very strong correlation; however, this might be extremely high because of overfitting. 

In conclusion, neural networks show that undecided majors, Pell Grant, distance from ISU, # of initiated events, family income median, total consumer expenditures, high school low income percentage, and high school GPA are the major factors in whether a student enrolls at Illinois State University or not. 

Confirmatory Analysis: The purpose of a confirmatory analysis is to test whether the data fit a hypothesized measurement model. In other words, it tests whether measures of a factor are consistent with a researcher's understanding of a factor. 


This test confirms that ACT, GPA, major, Pell Grant, and # of initiated events make a significant difference in students enrolling at Illinois State University. All graphs before this model test showed these factors were important as this test makes the paper more reliable. 






ISU Actual: 3480
ISU Predicted: 3388

ISU Actual:  5391
ISU Predicted: 5299

Conclusion: This section will present our results visual and in tabular form separately for each of the above techniques. Additional analysis and synthesize your findings. Patterns discovered using data mining techniques will be discussed. Lastly, this section will offer suggestions as to how a manager may use these findings and how this study may be extended in the future.

Group Means Comparison: For Hypothesis about Two Related Means two tests can be performed. One is a paired samples t-test which examines differences in same group before and after a treatment. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test is a nonparametric test for examining significant differences between two related samples. This test is used as an alternative for a paired samples t-test when the population cannot be assumed to be normally distributed (PowerPoint). According to Yale, confidence intervals and tests of significance are useful tools for the difference between two population parameters. 

Multicollinearity is often an interdependency condition that can exist quite apart from the nature of dependence between X and Y.  Multicollinearity constitutes a threat and both to proper specification and the effective estimation of the type of structural relationship commonly sought through the use of regression techniques (Farrar, D & Glauber, R). According to Bougie, multicollinearity is a statistical phenomenon in which two or more independent variables in a multiple regression model are highly correlated (319). The most simple way to detect multicollinearity is to check the correlation matrix for the independent variables. Correlations above .70 is a first sign for multicollinearity. 


	This analysis confirms that Pell Grant, GPA< ACT, and # of initiated events are significant factors in whether a student enrolls at Illinois State University. 







ROC test enables us to determine if the particular variable is showing significance by chance or if there is indeed a cause and effect relationship. Any number with an Area Under Curve(AUC) higher than 0.50 means that there is a definite causation with 1 being perfect causation.
A AUC above .50 means there is validity to a test. Therefore, a .59 AUC means there is validity to our test. 



A .86 AUC means there there is a strong validity to our test. As discussed previously, the closer to one the better.



The AUC above .50 means that there is some validity to our test but not as strong as the other test. The higher the number is to one the better.


This particular test was barely above .50 which means that there is not much validity to the test. 



Undecided hypothesis means testing






ACT Hypothesis means testing




If student initiated activities is greater than 5



Hypothesis gpa testing



References 
Bougie, S. (2013) Research Methods for Business: A Skill-Building Approach, 6th Edition

Chauhan & Singh (2009). NEURAL NETWORKS IN DATA MINING. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology. Link to article can be found:  http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/NeuralNetworks.CheungCannonNotes.pdf
Farrar, D and Glauber, R (1967). The review o of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 29, No 1. Link to article can be found: https://www.rochester.edu/college/psc/clarke/405/FarrarGlauber.pdf

Seltman, H. (2015). Experimental Design and Analysis. Link to book can be found: http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~hseltman/309/Book/Book.pdf

Park, H. (2005). Comparing Group Means: The T-test and One-way
ANOVA Using STATA, SAS, and SPSS
http://stat.smmu.edu.cn/DOWNLOAD/ebook/statistics_course.pdf

Yale (1998). Link to article can be found: http://www.stat.yale.edu/Courses/1997-98/101/meancomp.htm
